The Other Gangs of New York
==================


FOR serious enthusiasts of 19th-century municipal street crime, these are heady times indeed. The long-delayed release of Martin Scorsese's ''Gangs of New York,''<sup><a href="#fn1" id="ref1">1</a></sup> in and of itself, is a cause for celebration among aficionados of Manhattan-based violence, for at long last the story of the Dead Rabbits<sup><a href="#fn2" id="ref2">2</a></sup> , the Daybreak Boys<sup><a href="#fn3" id="ref3">3</a></sup>, the Patsy Conroys and the Roach Guards can be told. Coming on the heels of the reissue of Herbert Asbury's magisterial ''Gangs of New York: An Informal History of the Underworld,'' and renewed interest in Luc Sante's splendid 1991 book, ''Low Life,'' Mr. Scorsese's film, which opens Friday, is sure to rekindle America's love affair with its long-forgotten Irish-American street gangs and their nativist enemies.

Even if Leonardo DiCaprio's casting as an Irish immigrant still seems a bit capricious.

Yet it would be a great misfortune if the narrow socioeconomic focus of ''The Gangs of New York'' on Irish immigrants and their vicious native-born nemeses obscured the important role played by other, less famous criminal enterprises, some of them from less visible ethnic groups. Though Mr. Scorsese can be forgiven for concentrating on high-profile outfits with colorful names like the Plug Uglies, the Swamp Angels and the Slaughter Housers, history records that many other gangs played an equally important role in the evolution of Gotham's underworld. It is our purpose here to commemorate these forgotten criminal organizations, whose epic malfeasance now risks being eclipsed by the intense Scorsesian sun.

Of the mid-19th-century gangs that dominated the streets of New York, none wielded greater power or manifested a greater capacity for violence than the Louche Knickerbockers. Ruling the meatpacking district with an iron fist throughout the 1840's and 1850's, these impoverished descendants of Manhattan's original Dutch settlers waged vicious wars with competing gangs like the Knights of the Tappan Zee, the Naked Amstels and the Van Eck Boys. Ultimately swept under by the engulfing tides of Irish, Italian and Eastern European immigration in the second half of the 19th century, the Louche Knickerbockers remain a vital link with New York's criminal past, and will soon be the subject of a 36-part Ken Burns documentary, ''The America Nobody Knows, Least of All Me.''

From 1820 until the dawn of the Gilded Age, most violent street gangs were concentrated in the poorer districts of Manhattan's Lower East Side, because poor people are easier to kill. (Poor people don't act as surprised about the whole thing as the middle class, and are less likely to cry out, ''Murder!'' or ''Why me?'') But there were a number of important exceptions. The Flippant Goths, a shadowy network of German immigrants based in Yorkville, controlled the profitable schnitzel trade on the Upper East Side, ceaselessly warring with their counterparts in such enterprises as the Gramercy Park Untermenschen and the Kips Bay Kindertötenlieders. To their numbers can be added such long-forgotten Austrian-American gangs as the Gutter Anschlusses, the Waltzing Orchids, the Sinister Vermin and Fritzi's Deadly Magpies. Some observers insist to this day that a Prague-based network of Czechoslovak street gangs may have briefly flourished in this period; the myth is the subject of a forthcoming film, ''My Big Fat Czech Criminal Enterprise.'' However, since Czechoslovakia did not actually come into being until after World War I, there is reason to believe that this project may be yet another case of cynical ethnic pandering.

After the Civil War, as street violence became more socially acceptable in New York, the first middle-class gangs came into existence. Most of them were concentrated in Midtown, where they preyed on well-heeled patrons of the New York Public Library, often killing them for their bejeweled snuffboxes. It is now believed that Manhattan literacy rates remained at a shockingly low level throughout this period because of the dangers inherent in visiting the public library; as many as 3,000 book borrowers may have been murdered in 1873 alone. Not until Chester A. Arthur struck a deal with Tammany Hall to put these bloodthirsty middle-class gangsters on the Civil Service rolls did the violence abate.

Recruiting heavily in such prosperous Hudson River villages as Dobbs Ferry, Larchmont and Tarrytown, these criminal enterprises used seemingly innocuous names like the Varlets, the Fussbudgets, the Foolish Scoundrels and Hell's Ne'er-Do-Wells. Yet this effete image camouflaged a sanguinary reality, for the gangs were as sadistic and dangerous as any that ever populated the streets of New York. Led by such psychopaths as Fred (Rat Face) Pettigrew and Serge (the Human Hail Fellow Well Met) Dauphin-Poitiers, Hell's Ne'er-Do-Wells etched their names in blood in the annals of New York history. Surprisingly legibly, in fact.

By and large, membership in 19th-century street gangs was circumscribed by one's ethnic background; if you were Irish, you would not be welcome in a nativist gang, and if you were black, you would be ill advised to seek membership in an Italian gang. But as time went along, and the various ethnic groups began to blend in the melting pot, street gangs gradually loosened their membership requirements.

FIRST came La Chose Nôtre, the Gallic prototype of the far more successful Italian Mafia, which admitted both French and Belgian cutthroats, effectively ending the reign of the Cruel Walloons, who wreaked havoc in Manhattan's Little Antwerp during the 1860's. Next came Los Hermanos de Taipei, the city's first Sino-Latino gang, which later introduced a chain of highly successful yet inexpensive restaurants characterized by imaginative menus. Last but not least came the Labrador Kings, a one-size-fits-all gang admitting anyone from the Canadian Maritimes who was handy with a meat cleaver.

By the end of the 19th century, street gangs had begun to fade into the pages of history. This was partly because politics paid better than crime, and because being a policeman entitled you to a pension, but also because as immigrants adjusted to American life, they preferred to move their violence indoors where it was warmer -- and direct it at their families. At the same time, the simultaneous rise of American football and vaudeville helped sublimate a great deal of male pathological violence. Over the years, as the city has become more dainty, more genteel, more prissy, it has largely forgotten -- or deliberately denied -- its savage, primordial past.

Yet the sleeping beast is there and, if disturbed, it will one day rise from its slumber and slink into the streets, seeking fresh victims. Perhaps as early as this weekend. Maybe in Queens or Brooklyn. Auteur of one of the most mesmerizingly gruesome films in recent memory, Martin Scorsese is to be congratulated for reminding us all of our hideously violent roots.

And such a change of pace for the director.

   ---
   <sup id="fn1">1. [Amsterdam Vallon (Leonardo DiCaprio) is a young Irish immigrant released from prison. He returns to the Five Points seeking revenge against his father's killer, William Cutting (Daniel Day-Lewis), a powerful anti-immigrant gang leader. He knows that revenge can only be attained by infiltrating Cutting's inner circle. Amsterdam's journey becomes a fight for personal survival and to find a place for the Irish people in 1860's New York.]<a href="#ref1" title="Jump back to footnote 1 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
  
  <sup id="fn2">2. [The Dead Rabbits was the name of an Irish American criminal street gang in Lower Manhattan in the 1850s. The Dead Rabbits were so named after a dead rabbit was thrown into the center of the room during a gang meeting, prompting some members to treat this as an omen, withdraw, and form an independent gang. Their battle symbol was a dead rabbit on a pike. They often clashed with Nativist political groups who viewed Irish Catholics as a threatening and criminal subculture. The Dead Rabbits were given the nicknames the "Mulberry Boys" and the "Mulberry Street Boys" by the New York City Police Department because they were known to have operated along Mulberry Street in the Five Points.]<a href="#ref2" title="Jump back to footnote 2 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
  
  <sup id="fn3">3. [The Daybreak Boys was a New York City street gang during the mid nineteenth century.
   
   Formed in the late 1840s, by 1852 the teenaged Daybreak Boys were suspected by police to have been responsible for 20 to 40 murders between 1850 and 1852 as well as stealing goods estimated at $200,000. The gang was said to have a prospective member kill at least one man as a requirement for joining. Newspapers at the time report, perhaps with some exaggeration, that many gang members may have been as young as 12.
   
   Under the leadership of members such as Nicholas Saul, Bill Howlett, Patsy the Barber, Slobbery Jim, "Cowlegged" Sam McCarthy, and Sow Madden, the gang was known for its reputation of unprovoked murder and sabotaging ships and other property, regardless of value, along the New York waterfront. The gang's actions would soon force police to take action against them. Led by New York police officers Blair, Spratt, and Gilbert, over 12 gang members were killed in several gunfights in 1858. By the end of 1859 the gang, having lost much of its membership, was eventually broken up. Many of its members later became prominent criminals during the next several decades.]<a href="#ref3" title="Jump back to footnote 3 in the text.">↩</a></sup>
